So we're talking a little
bit about higher,
was called kind of higher
order observables.
Higher order observables are if you think
about higher order components in react or
name your framework of choice,
it is simply a component that
renders another component.
And in most programming everything is easy
until you get to the point where you are,
when you're like mapping over an array,
fine.
I can do that, anyone can do that.
Iterate over an array,
what happens that array contains an array.
Well, now you've got to
recursively go into that array,
do everything in that array,
so on and so forth, right?
And so you can either use recursion and,
for instance JavaScript these days, right?
Has a built in like flat map, the idea of
like take this multi dimensional array and
just make it one regular
array of all the values,
that is also super useful in terms
of working with observables,
right, okay, they have clicked, great.
But that click maybe what you
wanna map it into a promise.
Well, a promise in this case will
also become an observable, so
now you've got an observable floating
down your observable stream, right?
What really, you don't want the observable
in that case, you want the value, Mark.
>> Some of these operators be used to
implement an undo operation in case
an optimistic UI update should roll back.
>> I mean, you could, right?
Like if you think about scan, you can
take care of all of the state, right?
There's also, you have the ability
to kind of replay in some cases.
I think with scan is probably
the best way to do it, right?
Because for a lot of these, we'll see the
ability to like switch between pieces, but
keeping track of that state and taking the
different events that kind of go through
and be able to manage all that will let
you kind of adjust that as you go along.
So, with most things
everything is easy until you
have things that appear in other things.
So for instance,
this would be problematic.
Remember when we had that original
delay in the notification,
we slammed on a bunch of times and we
waited 2 seconds and then we got all them.
Right, if you want it to theoretically
have a observable that then
we'll use have to then delay it
a certain number of milliseconds.
Well, now you have an observable
in your observable.
And so you'll get is when
you subscribe to example,
you're gonna get an observable,
cuz that's what you return from your map.
Right, is that what you wanted, [LAUGH]
yeah, sometimes we don't get what we want,
we get what JavaScript tells
us we get we like it, so
that's what we'll get in this case and
like a more common example is.
The button got clicked or
here was a string, or
here was an array of things I want to
use from fetch to get observables.
Again, now I have a stream of
observables that have a stream.
What I really wanna do if I can take
two observables from the top level and
merge them together, I should be able to
take observables in my observables and
flatten them into the main observable
like the sacred timeline if you will.
And merge my timelines into the main
timeline in this case, and if you're
thinking I should be able to do that, good
news, good, you're thinking correctly.
So one strategy for doing this,
there's an operator called merge all, so
merge all will basically take all
of the kind of child observables in
your stream and merge them together
just like when we merge the first and
the second observables before, right?
Now, this is common enough that there's
also a fun helper called merge map.
You wanna take a lucky
guess what that does.
>> Are these maps together?
>> Yeah, it's like flat map, right?
It maps and
then it merges them all together.
So a lot of times, you will see that
happen way more frequently than you will
map and then merge.
You'll usually just merge map and
save yourself a whole,
I guess 9 characters, 10 characters
of code, I guess the comma so
11 characters of code, you can merge
map and you can do it all in one pass.
And a lot of the rules that we saw
before apply as well for concat, so
concat will do the same thing,
it will do what concat did previously,
you'll map over all these items.
There'll become nested observables,
plays with the first one,
then play through the second one,
then play through the third one, right?
Or so on and so forth, right?
It all depends like the unique
problem that you're trying to solve,
if you don't have opinions,
merge is your best choice.
You're like, whatever, someone admitted,
I wanna deal with that value, but there
are times where you want to coordinate
an orchestrate the different asynchronous
events and that's where concat and
two other fun ones are gonna show up.
So the more useful ones even,
merge map super useful concat map,
sometimes useful, like when you need
it in particular, switch map and
exhaust map are like cousins
of the bounce and throttle.
Right, and they kind of again,
they work the opposite of each other.
Switch maps says, drop whatever you're
doing, something else has admitted.
I don't even care what
I was doing previously.
Forget it,
I don't wanna know anymore, right?
I wanna do the new thing.
Exhaust map is a little more stressed out.
It's like, I'm very busy doing this thing,
not doing other things.
I'm done with this thing.
And then, if anything else is
there to be done, I will go do it.
The interesting part is, like very similar
to debounce and throttle, switch map
will simply cancel, stop no more, it'll
move on to the new hotness everytime.
Exhaust map will just ignore
things until it's done, right?
When it's done, that if something else
wants to emit, it'll switch over to that
one, but it will finish what it did,
what has done previously.
Now we've talked a little bit about
autocomplete along the way here.
So for instance, like, cool, maybe they
stopped typing for 300 milliseconds or
debounce time has fired.
We're ready to make another request.
I don't care that you're halfway through
an API request is taking too long.
Well, we're done,
they're no longer searching for that.
I don't wanna know when it comes back.
I'm uninterested, right?
We have new things we're searching for.
And when that request comes back, whether
it's before or after the other one, right?
If you have a slow internet connection,
you're the first request might
come back after the second one.
You don't wanna update the UI for
the thing they're done searching for,
you wanna update the UI for
the thing they most recently searched for.
Exhaust map will be like,
we're loading things right now.
I know they're rage clicking that button.
We're loading things right now.
We're doing it right.
This is maybe for
data that's not gonna change too much.
You don't need to fire off
a bunch of different requests.
Like this request will get them the data
they want, just don't fire off new
requests until this comes back and
then they wanna search again, fine, right?
This could be a field where it's like we
are loading the previous thing, cool.
There's just a few more that we
won't play with too much but
I just wanna make you
aware of their existence.
Remember we saw a fork join before it gave
you the last value of all the observables
combined latest all will simply as
long as all of them have admitted.
It'll wait until each and every one of
them admits, once they have all admitted,
you will get an array of all the values,
right?
So if there's still, when you're waiting
on, you dont get anything, but once
everyone has done something, you'll get
an array of all the things that happened.
If you are impatient and want this ASAP,
you can use a start with to kind
of kick off each one of them and
then you'll get an array each and every
time any of them admit, right, so this can
be useful if you're building a UI like,
hey, I'm making a pixel painter, right?
I wanna know where their mouse is.
I wanna know what color, right,
these are all things that can change.
Right, give me the latest of all of
these things depending on what we're
doing, right?
And then combine latest
with just a way to kind of,
I wanna rely on this other observable, I,
give me the last one of that every time,
so the question is, if you use exhaust
map and things happen while you're doing
the first thing are those
things backed up into a queue.
They're completely ignored, they are
dropped, right, we don't, like we're busy.
We're not doing those things afterwards,
they could have raged clicked.
So the heart's content.
We're not dealing with it.
We're not doing it.
We're finishing what we did in this case,
and we'll go ahead and when we're done,
we'll do the next thing, right, like if an
autosave is in progress, you might wanna
let that autosave go through or
maybe you wanna switch it to the new one.
A lot of this will depend on the exact
type of interaction you're trying
to develop, but
the idea is that you have these options,
you have the option to kinda
finish what you started.
You have the option to drop what you're
doing and do the new thing or merge, hey,
I don't care like things happen,
like they can start and stop that timer,
I'm unconcerned,
I don't really care in this case.